23/9/14- Minute of Attorney General

In my opinion the treaty confers upon the government the right to deal with waste land without paying compensation to any person. By wasteland, I mean unoccupied land which is not owned by any person and which under native law or customs might be occupied by a member of the tribe either with or without consent of the chief. The government is under the obligation to make the payment provided for in clause 7 of the treaty . 

The fact that such payment are in arrear does not in itself terminate the treaty.

Assuming that the land required by Mr Thomas Welsh and Co is in fact on the property of Johnny of Akri Atani, the question that arises is if the government is entitled under the terms of the treaty or under the law in force to dispossess Johnny of his land, paying compensation which the Government considers fair but which is not accepted by Johnny and grant a lease of the land to the European firm.

In my opinion, the government is not entitled to do this either under the terms of the treaty or under any law in force in Nigeria.

Under the terms of the treaty, the Government has undertaken not to interfere with the right of any natives without first obtaining his consent. This undertaking is modified by Clause 5, which is the following terms...

'Should the National African Company Ltd require land at any place in the country ceded to them for any purpose whatsoever, "they, the National African Company Limited will compensate the owner or owners therof"

As I read this clause the company are entitled to acquire by compulsory purchase any land required for the use of the company, and the government is now entitled to acquire the land for public purposes. The clause does not authorize the government to take land from one person and grant it to another.

If the land belongs to Johnny and Messsrs. Thomas Welsh and Co are to obtain a lease of the land, either they must obtain a lease under the Native Lands and Acquisition Ordinance or the Government must obtain the land by private treaty with Johnny and grant a lease to Messrs Thomas Welsh and Co.

R.M Combe
23/7/1914